the agendas yet.
>> I
didn't screen till I print them.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Okay. Um, there we are.
Can you do the uh like All right. So,
please that because my eyes are there.
We call that beautiful thing. A
>> simple agenda tonight. Very simple.
Okay. So, we have my greenhouse. Is she
supposed to speak?
Are we waiting for Marina to come back?
>> Excuse me.
>> Waiting for
taking the notes and everything. So,
>> well, believe already.
>> Okay. So, all to order. We have one,
two, three, five members. Uh Mike
Greenhouse, Fred Red Oliver. Actually,
we have four members and we'll see an
alternate when the regular meeting week
starts. Oh, okay. We'll see Joan. Okay.
At that time. Okay. So, Bill, Kathleen,
and so this is our continuation of the
application of Christine Gomez um
seeking the variance for the Lola road.
So, presentation by the applicant. Um
just for the record attorney for
representing the applicant I have the
applicant home owners here with me or
property owners I should say. Um I
didn't really prepare an additional
presentation. I know that we were
continued primarily because we wanted to
have a full compliment of five members
to vote on the application. Um there was
also a question of me just putting down
a a bit of a a summary that I presented
at the last meeting so you could digest
it further. And then I'm really more
prepared just to answer questions um at
this time. Um I certainly don't have any
new legal argument that hasn't already
been expressed.
>> Well, I know Joan will be seated as an
alternate. So we have five time.
>> Yes.
>> I don't know. I know. I I've been the
chair for so long.
>> Yeah.
>> But she might have questions that
>> Absolutely.
And I presume that you had an
opportunity to either review the
recordings or review the minutes and I
vote for
>> Okay. Okay.
>> Thank you. We appreciate that.
>> And you feel that you were qualified to
to to participate or vote in this
matter.
>> Say if they seek me, I am.
>> Yes. She she feels that she's been
updated by watching the video. Watch the
video. You've reviewed the file, right?
And so you feel fair to to participate
in orgs.
>> Yes, I can.
>> Thank you.
>> That's the
Thank you.
>> So, yes. So, if there's any questions,
um again, if you want to refer to the
summary of the argument in my legal
basis for it that I had submitted that
really walks you through what I had
presented at the last time. Um we're
starting with the premise that um well I
guess what what I should say is the
primary first and foremost question that
we presented before you is that um we
would like your confirmation this is a
legal non-conforming law and as such
then the basis for our requested
variance can be the aden principle which
is a reduction in nonconformities we
would be reducing via this law and
adjustment the nonconformities nothing
to do with lot with and law size. Um
there will be no other non-conformities,
no new non-conformity videos created,
just those two will be reduced and made
more compliant. Um I've set forth my
arguments as to why we maintain that it
should be found a legal non-conforming
mod. As you know, we're in a bit of a
quandry. We can't definitively prove it
one way or the other. We can't
definitively disprove it either because
the town's own records only go back to
1956 despite having um purported to
adopt zoning in 1950. Um we've done the
best with any information at our
disposal and we can either um
I I think it's it's for you to now based
on the arguments I've made make a
determination. Have we given you enough
information in the record to make a
reasoned conclusion that yes, we will
deem this to be a non-conforming lot and
therefore evaluate a variance request
based on Adal sin or or not. Um and and
even without the direct evidence of what
the regulations said in 1954
when this lock was created, um we've
given you some inferences, right? the
best we can get based on what the
regulations said in 1956 based on some
minutes of a zoning hearing that
repealed and modified changes to
regulations. All of that I think is also
a basis for you concluding that you
could infer that the prior regulations
either didn't set a minimum lot area or
width or set one that's different than
what's in the 1956 ones. Otherwise, why
would they have changed it in 1956? and
therefore lead to the conclusion that it
it was likely a compliant law when it
was created.
So, I I wish I could be clear. I mean, I
wish it could be cleaner is what I want
to say. I wish it could be cleaner. I
wish I could give you a definitive
answer. Um I did research who is the
keeper of the town's records. And
according to the state library, they're
to be maintained in perpetuity with the
town. So, the state librarian wouldn't
have a copy of these. This is something
that should be housed in the town
clerk's office. Again, there's just
nothing there prior to the 56 Rex.
So,
based on all of that, is there anything
specifically you want to ask?
>> I don't know if this John. So, I have a
kind of a lawyer report, but you might
um I feel like
you're So, now we're going to put a
house on a lot that never had a house
before, but and your argument is based
on the old lot, but you've changed a
lot. So, I feel like
I don't know. Does the reduction in
nonconformity really apply? Because now
you have a brand new lot that's
non-conforming.
>> Well, we have a lot that was
non-conforming. We have a lot from 1954,
a piece of land, and whether you call it
a building lot or not, it's a it's a
parcel of land that's been in existence
standalone without any adjoining
property um in common ownership since
1954.
And in 1954,
that that piece was created and it's
been vacant ever since. So that parcel
exists. What we want to do now is modify
the lines, the lot lines of that parcel
and enlarge it to become more compliant
with the regulations. Whether a building
goes on there or not, it would be more
compliant with the regulations because
the regulations require 40,000 square
foot and 200 foot minimum lot width. So,
we will be making it more compliant.
Still not compliant, but more compliant
than what's presently existing with the
law.
and and the house um the house will
fully comply with all setback
requirements and all um lot coverage
requirements. So, it's really solely a
matter of the lot width and area and and
whether there's a house there or not,
the principle doesn't change that we're
making that parcel more compliant with
some of the regulations.
>> I just feel like it's not that parcel
anymore. It's a new parcel.
Well, with the variances, it would be a
a modified parcel,
but we're not creating it out of
nowhere. I mean, it does exist right now
and it has since 1954 based on the chain
of title.
>> I mean,
>> that that plot has always existed
without structure.
>> Correct.
But there are lots of pieces of land
that have not yet been built on.
>> Sure. Right. Right. And the and the I
guess I want to not lose fact of the
site that or lose sight of the fact that
it built upon the structure itself can
conform with all applicable regulations.
The structure can perhaps. Okay.
Um, I just was wondering if there's like
precedent of similar type.
Um, and I I apologize that I haven't had
time to get here in a couple weeks um to
to research it for myself. Um, but
perhaps examples of um because there's
many non-conforming lots apparently
around the lake is my understanding.
um where similarly
um
a vacant lot was purchased with the
intention of placing a structure and has
zoning issued variance previously?
And then a second follow-up question to
that would be
has zoning
also granted variance in the past? Does
there pass precedent for zoning to grant
variance with the stipulation that they
make an adjacent lot less conforming or
make it non-conforming? That's
specifically in regards to the situation
regarding the septic plan. Um because
foreseeable future um if one lot was
sold, I I just I just
>> want to know if there is past president.
I I can't talk to whether there's past
president, but I do want to caution you.
We are not making the existing house lot
non-compliant in any way with zoning.
Zoning is fully satisfied. It will still
meet all u bulk area requirements, size,
setbacks, frontage. Um the that lot will
remain compliant. So, I know it'll be a
little unusual because the septic u it
will have someone else's septic via
easement on the front part of it, but
there's no non-compliance issue. If we
were making it non-compliant, it would
be an issue. Then the advice and
principle really would not come into
play because you can only use that to
make properties more compliant, not
create new non-compliances.
So, um that that's kind of an important
differential there. So, I just like to
point that out. Um, and with regard to
the septic being on
um the existing house lot and kind of
off property, kind of a little bit of
both. Um, having septics within an
easement on adjacent property is
something the health department has
allowed will allow. Um, and it's really
no different than having an easement for
drainage onto your neighbor's property.
I mean, often times you see a a roof
drain, a curtain drain, or something
being drained from one property to
another. Here we're, you know, putting
our leech fields and draining that into
the property. But we can memorialize
that via permanent easements that will
run with the land, be apparent to
anybody who would buy the property and
and you know, spell out the rights and
obligations in that document.
So on on that note, one of the thoughts
I had, it's kind of going a little bit
here.
>> I went to a a site where they had a
bamboo forest on this bamboo forest
>> and it's green year round in Rhode
Island and I thought, "Wow, this would
be really cool."
>> Bamboo is invasive.
>> It's my point. It's very evasive. So um
I was told never plant bamboo or any
because it's invasive. It goes into your
septic system.
>> But then that made me think too is so
this piece of property right here that
the septic system would be on
>> the the owners of this lot and I know
it's you now but in the future um they
would never be able to build something
in that area, put trees or plants in
that area because the septic systems
there. And I also thought um again I'm
pontificating a little bit. I put a
trench down the side of my yard once to
put underground lines out to my pool
house and the guy that dug the line said
your sh is right there. I said, "Yeah."
He says, "Well, you got all these trees
you want to plant and you have to dig
this." And I said, "Yeah." He goes, "You
don't want to do that." So, I guess my
point is, how far of an area in addition
to this would you have to say to people,
you can't plant trees in this area? They
didn't didn't know because those trees
could grow roots into that septic system
and now the person that owns the new
house could say you have I have dam you
have damaged my my septic system and I'm
going to sue you for damage is because
your trees that you planted on your lot
even though they're outside the septic
system area had roots go in there and
now that's my one of my thoughts I had
in my head.
>> Yeah, I don't think that we really have
to worry about putting any restrictions
beyond the septic easement area. Number
one, it's a steeply wooded is a steeply
sloped area. Correct. Yeah. I was just
thinking if if you were to go to see the
pro property
>> then did you go to see the property and
then the main property
>> just from the road you know
>> right and so our main uh house and the
yard and you know the whole area that we
used we have never in the well 35 years
>> 35 years used that down there in 35
years um because the the area and the
yard is is big and the grass and
everything is lovely up there. Like you
wouldn't even go down there for that. So
the slopes really separate the house
really separate if you were to see it.
But I I mean I appreciate you really
giving thought to this. I I appreciate
that.
>> So within the actual septic easement,
you can see where the primary would be
to see where the per tests are. The
primary is pretty close to the um to the
property line in the interior part of
the sept of the of the septic easement.
So I don't think even if someone planted
which again based on the topography and
photos I think it's unlikely anyone
would plant but even if someone planted
outside of that easement area I don't
expect that
>> I'm sorry.
>> Yes.
>> Go ahead.
>> I just point you pointed out the exact
location of the primary the primary
field versus the ement area.
>> Yeah. So the easement area is actually
quite a bit larger
>> right
>> than the um
>> I think we've given the surrounding area
to protect the the structure in there.
So so I for for for reasons of the fact
that I think it's impractical that
anyone will plant anything down there or
do anything with
>> with that area um other than the septic
system. I don't think we're going to
have any interference. Um, another thing
I'll just note and and I know variances
can't have anything to do with the
ownership and who owns the property, but
I will just note from a practical
standpoint, my client does expect her
son to build a house there. It will be a
familyowned property, at least in the
foreseeable future when it's first
built. Um, so with that, you know,
relationship in mind, I I don't really
expect any any
um incompatibility by having the
easement on the rear houses's property.
>> Can I ask about the easement? Um,
I I'm assuming the easement is going to
give the uh give parcel B
>> the right to pass and repass and um
maintain.
>> Yes.
>> Including
>> repair, replace,
>> including mowing and and repairs and all
that good stuff.
>> It'll be very broad. I mean, I I'm happy
to review the language with the town
attorney to make sure it covers
everything, but um I envision that it
will be the right to pass, repass,
construct, maintain, repair, replace as
necessary, a septic system, and
allertinances that may be necessary um
and to do routine maintenance. It will
also allow the owner of the house lot,
the existing house lot to use it for a
purpose that's not inconsistent and
interfere with any of the septic. Um so
title still remains in the house
property and they have some limited
rights to use it but again it's so um
kind of remote in a way from the house
that it's really impractical for use
anyway. So so I don't envision them
retaining any real um activity and and
exerting any control over that land.
They really just own the underlying fee.
>> Right. But somebody's going to have to
maintain it to prevent trees from
establishing themselves.
>> And that will be an obligation on par
owner to make sure that they protected
their their son system
>> and and if by chance that was poorly
maintained and caused
pollution on someone else's property,
who's that would be
>> whoever it's it's the septic owner's
responsibility. So they would be
responsible for any damage there, right?
I mean, you can almost kind of wipe out
the basement in your mind and almost
make it seem like that that land is
really primarily for the benefit of and
under the control of parcel be but legal
title of the underlying fee is still
owned by the the house so that the house
can stay compliant. That's the I think I
mentioned to you that was the important
drive behind that. Um it also only works
if we're not creating new
non-compliances. We wanted to make sure
that the existing house lot um that my
clients live in stays compliant with all
zoning requirements.
>> Um so can we just review how much of a
nonconformity are we asking in terms of
square footage of the lot and the
different dimensions?
>> Sure. So right now I put that in my
memo. Um, right now we are making the
lot, which is presently 18,73
square ft.
>> We're increasing it to 25,18
square ft
and we're increasing the lot width from
50 ft to 88.7 ft.
And so 25,118
is the square footage and the minimum
called for by the zoning regulations is
60,000
>> 60,000. Okay. So that's still a big
Okay. 60
>> and keep going. And as far as the
dimensions, so
>> how how far off are we on the on the
various dimensions?
>> Oh, no. We're not at all. the the um the
as you can see from the proposed
location of the house lot we will be
front side and rear yard setbacks. Yeah,
I see the setbacks. But in terms of the
dimensions,
>> the the
>> the the frontage for example, is that
>> Well, that you don't have a frontage
requirement. You only have a lock wick,
which is the 200. Um,
>> we actually do have a frontage
requirement as of January 15, 2026.
>> Okay. But not as of the date we
submitted the application. But what is
it now?
>> 200 200 feet.
>> Okay. So, lot within and frontage are
200.
>> They changed the change. So 200 feet is
what's required. 50 feet is what's
existing. 88.7 is what we're proposing
to increase it to.
>> And set that road is 50 feet from the
center.
>> Yeah.
>> And they're in 83. Yeah.
>> What's the square footage of the
proposed house
>> of the house?
>> Um the Well, we don't have a final
building plan for the house. I mean,
that could change, but it will have to
comply with all setbacks. What we're
showing here just because it's a it's
still a small lot so it can't really
accommodate the McMansion the vanish
store um is a gosh I don't I don't have
>> four bedroom
can you tell the rough dimensions of it
I don't have
>> 30 by 40 on the rough
>> 3000
short
>> yeah 300
>> it could be I mean again there's no
final building plan for it
>> so I'm sorry
>> so somewhere in the neighborood 2,000
square ft. It sounds like it would be
kind of a ballpark. Visit is 30 by40.
That's 1,200,200. Yeah. So, if it has a
second story, then it could be up to
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Okay. Mr. Chairman, on the recommend I I
have a question on that. I was going to
follow. Typically, if your plan shows a
30 by 40, that's like the envelope
within which the building will occur.
So, it won't if this variance is
approved, it can't go bigger than that.
Oh, no.
>> No, we don't expect to go bigger. I
mean, I guess the only thing I would say
though, Mark, is um
>> Attorney Grant, sorry.
>> Sorry.
>> Um is that as long as we still don't
need setback variances, I would think
there's a little flexibility with that.
I mean, we as long as we're out of the
front, side, and rear. I mean, that
because the size of the house doesn't
really change the variance that's being
granted for the this is really more of
an ac for the lot area and width. This
is really more academic because my
clients can live with working within
that but I I
>> notra case you know that various case
where where you know sort of what you
see is what you get and I think that it
is relevant for the board.
>> Okay. I mean, if if the house is going
to be twice as big,
>> that might affect their their their if
it's if it's roughly this if it's a
little different shape, I don't think
it's a big deal, but if if if the board
knew that the house is going to be much
bigger, that is a factor. I'm not saying
there would make a difference, but it's
a factor they would consider. So, so my
understanding is this, you'll be within
that envelope
>> or smaller because Yeah. Oh, absolutely.
Actually, I was thinking smaller. They
were thinking smaller.
>> Okay. But yes, that that if you want to
tie the approval specifically to this
footprint, we don't object to that. No.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and I'm going to ask this question
before. So if I did, I apologize. So the
um the area for the suffix system,
could that be sold along with that or
would that make the original lot too
small?
>> It would make the original house lot too
small. And not too small really. It
would affect the lot width. So we could
probably still make the lot area work,
but they wouldn't have the requisite 200
ft of lot width. So it would become
non-compliant there.
>> So that's really the the the Okay.
>> touch point. Yeah.
>> I mean that would be the easy solution,
right? Then we
>> I just said we'll just add it to this
piece. But my my biggest concern all
along was let's folks protect what we
have and not make our existing lot
non-compliant.
>> Right.
>> So that's really my you know playing
lawyer and being real particular about
complying with the law.
>> So yeah. So to make the new lot
compliant you'd have to bring it from
roughly 25,000 square feet up to 60,000.
So that's just no
>> there's not enough land to do that.
Okay.
>> Yeah. And I mean I I and this gets into
the whole, you know, is this in
accordance with the comprehensive plan
and consistent with the neighborhood. I
talked about this at the last meeting
and I also put it in my summary. I mean
there are a lot of undersized lots in
this area. Um we pointed out at least
four within street, you know, 700 or
700.
>> If you drive around the lake, you'll see
700 feet or so that are what when I
would I walk the lake loop all the time.
the lake and you start seeing the house.
You see, you get to know everybody, you
get to know the houses. The house,
>> right? No, agree.
>> Once you cighted, the newest one's 35
years old.
>> Well, no.
The one that was built in 1930, 1953,
194. So,
>> prior to prior to the zoning record is
1954. Let's just be I just want to touch
on that because I know, you know, we're
we're building a new house and I know
that's causing you a little concern, but
I want you to recognize that people can
even do that without a barrier on an
undersized lot. Um the the zoning
regulations have some protections for
non-conforming lots. And it says that as
long as the lot was of record by 1950,
which is the only issue and the only
reason we're really here is because we
can't get those darn zoning records from
1950. We only go back to 1956. But as
long as the lot was zoned separate as of
1950 and as long as you can comply with
health code and don't need any setback
is then they can get a zoning permit to
build a house on an undersized lot. So
the only reason I'm not fitting my
clients aren't fitting squarely within
that and the reason they're coming here
is because of this issue with the lack
of regulations. So, I have to somehow
get you to agree that we're not going to
hold tight to that 1950 date because
there's nothing there to tell whether or
not we were existing or or what what was
what was existing at the time. Um, so
that's that's really the only reason my
client can't fit into here and I advise
them to come before this board to get a
variance because of that six-year gap.
But if Wayne had an application to build
a house,
>> yes,
>> on a lot that was less than 60,000
square feet, wouldn't you be checked it
because it didn't?
>> I would say you need to get a variance.
Yes.
>> Yeah. That you would have to get a
>> But you don't need to because it's a
legal if it's a non-conforming lot under
section 4.12 of your zoning regs. If
it's a non-conforming lot and it was
non-conforming
as of 1950 when the regs you know if it
was legally existing prior to rags and
there's no adjacent property owned just
like here um and you comply it with
health code and
you don't need any setback variances
then you can get
>> if you can if you can fit it
>> if you can without setback but if it's
undersized with regard to area or width
it you don't need a variance.
>> So, so those are those are where we're
undersides.
>> That's also dependent on the 1950
timeline. So, I think that's where my
question I I I don't know if I'm asking
it appropriately, but in regards to past
president,
um, are there cases
this side of 1950
where variance has been granted or is it
reasonable to infer
from the other existing non-conforming
lots that have structures? Is it
reasonable to infer from that that at
the time those were what was um
recognized as as legal building lots and
this was never intended to be built
upon.
>> For the record, Mark Brands I first of
all precedent for for CBA variances is
is mostly non-applicable because every
every situation is so unique. um okay
whether whether the houses that you're
observing some of them they may have
predated zoning they may have gotten
variances but it it really isn't
determinative for your decision I mean
the question before you is is whether u
in these on these facts in these
circumstances you feel that that a
variance is is in order by by virtue of
the aden case as attorney riser said
that that by the reduction in
non-conformity
so So, the fact that there are other
houses on non-comparing lots, maybe they
were varants, maybe they predated
zoning,
it doesn't really cut one way or the
other for you.
>> I I think I expect places. I I think I
think then I I want to make sure that
I'm not um
looking at it from from the so so we
were told that we need to approach it
from the realm of the fact that these
zoning regulations were not on the
record prior to a certain date. So we
were told that we needed to look at uh
how the how it applies um in regards to
the time frame that the zoning
regulations that was that was how we
were instructed or that was that so so
to say that like uh we shouldn't be
looking at past president I mean you can
consider it but it's not determinative I
mean people will always say to you
people always come to you and say well
you gave a variance to that guy so you
have to give me one to no that's what I
mean by precedent not being binded The
fact that you had a certain topography,
a certain location, a certain number of
square feet, you thought a variance was
in order in that case doesn't mean that
anything that's roughly comparable, you
have to give a variance. And vice versa.
Fact that you deny one in one's case
doesn't mean that you can't approve it
in one that arguably is similar because
no two pieces of propert are ever
exactly the same. Right?
The only way you precedent would be in a
case where you're interpreting what the
regulation means. And that would happen
if you were getting a CEO appeal
wouldn't wouldn't arise in a variance.
But if you were getting an appeal from
the decision of the zoning enforcement
officer, then it might be relevant as to
whether how that how those words were
read in the past. But for purposes of
tonight, you don't need to worry about
that.
>> Attorney Roger, do you do you
>> I agree with that 100. I think variances
are all case by case. Um I don't I
people might say otherwise but um I
don't think you should worry about
setting president or abiding by
president. I think you need to look at
this based on the facts and
circumstances and they're fairly unique.
I mean I don't you know we've got a
situation here. How many properties can
you say go back to their chain of title
in 1954
years um after adoption of zoning
regulations. Yet we can't have zoning
regulations. I mean this is the first
time I've ever had to make this
argument. Um, so, so it's it's a it's a
fairly unique situation all around. I
guess I I'm imploring on you um to not
hold it against the property owner and
the applicant that the town doesn't have
the records we need to
squarely within the zoning right that
says we can, you know, build even if
we're undersized.
um and prove to you that we were without
a doubt legally non-conforming when the
lot was created in 54. Yes.
>> So because I did my due diligence, I I
actually had a because I didn't know I
did I had a title search done which I
wasn't actually required to do. I I went
I felt like was my due diligence going
above and beyond. Um and I had a
attorney do the the the closing. The
title search went all the way back.
Everyone, oh, it's a clean title. They
went all the way back as far as they put
when and that I mean that for me was
doing my due diligence. If I the title
search had come back and brought
something to my attention, I I you know,
I would have had to make a choice at
that point, but I did my due diligence
and and there was the the town doesn't
simply didn't keep records for as long
as we're now talking about this
situation. So, I'm not sure what else I
could have done.
>> So, I guess I just got to understand
like this minimum lot area square
footage.
Um,
I mean, this rule of 60 was in place
before you bought the lot, I guess. I
mean, I could see where like if it was
the original owner and they bought it
when
it was considered buildable, but now
it's not real. I don't know.
>> What you're saying is she bought a lot
that she knew was non-conforming and
decided, I'm going to try and make it.
>> But the nonconformity runs with the
land, right? That that if it's a legal
non-conformity, it's a vested right in
the property. It doesn't matter if the
property changes hands. someone buys it
knowing it's legally non-conforming they
still have the same rights as the pre
the previous owner's if it if it's
legally non-conforming that's invested
property right that doesn't go away
despite transfer of ownership
>> it is legally non fact so what they're
saying like around lake they have a lot
of
>> I know that and that's the houses are
there and if something is there for more
than three years it's grandfathered kind
of
>> don't don't that's don't don't go there
that's a totally different
>> so this so my times going where I mean I
guess it doesn't apply. It's just
>> right it you know
>> the and and by the way attorney Riser is
correct. If a predecessor entitled had
had a hardship or had an adosent
argument then the current owner has a
hardship or adosent argument. So the
what you're referring to is often called
the buyer with knowledge rule. The buyer
with knowledge rule only only applies
where where the the prior owner had no
no hardship either. All right. So it's
true if if if the first owner could have
gotten a variance under the Edson rule,
then the current owner can get a can get
a variance under the Edson rule.
>> In I and forgive my naivity, I simply I
and you all have far more knowledge
about this. You have to understand as a
lay person, I walked around Lake. I saw
there's that there. I I contacted the
owner and and it is my naivee which is
why I hired an attorney and did a title
search. So that was my due diligence
because in you see all of this all the
time. You sit here every and I
appreciate your service to our town and
I love this town. I I just didn't
as a lay person you look and say well
there's a house there's a house there's
a house here's a lot for sale you know I
can buy this lot. So, I appreciate
you're coming from a different knowledge
base than I am and and literally I
thought I was going above and beyond
with a title search. I was kind of a
little bit proud of myself as a retired
teacher. I like to do my homework and um
I was proud of myself that I did that
and and yet it I guess it it still had
it still couldn't go as far as it needed
to because of the town record. So, that
but I I hear what you were saying,
>> Madam Chair. We're not going to get
rich. Just to keep this balanced, a
title search typically wouldn't disclose
zoning history or zoning rights. Okay.
It's looking at title. So,
no title search is going to tell you
whether you do or don't need variance.
>> Oh, no. I wasn't it wasn't about the
variance. It was simply about the
records going back as far as we would
need them to go back as one.
So, right. So the title search went back
confirmed good title for 40 years. The
title search
went
typically when an attorney gets a title
search they will review it and see okay
what's happened to the property during
that period of time. I would I would say
a good attorney should identify if a
property has been divided over that
period of time. They would want to be
investigating whether that division was
properly done. if it required
subdivision. If it didn't require
subdivision, then you'd have to go
another step further to make sure that
the parcels conformed. Um, it doesn't
appear that that was done. And there
would have been no way again, even if it
had been done, for them to verify
because the records, those records, the
zoning records don't go back far enough.
The only way we can definitively verify
is if we knew what the regulation said
in 1954
when the lot was first created. And we
just have a big blank there.
So we can either assume
it was legally created due to the lack
of records or we can infer
based on what the 1956 regulations said
that the 1954
N you know un available records um were
complied with you know and were
different than 1956. Again, I really do
think they had to have been different
than the 1956 ones cuz why else would
they have made a change to minimum lot
size and width? It had to have been
something different. You don't make a
change. It's the exact same. But I don't
know what it was. So, I can't say
definitively it complied. But I think
there's enough
reason and inference there for you to
reach that conclusion and a court to
uphold it if you so choose. The courts
will will give you a lot of discretion
in doing the best you can under the
circumstances with the information you
have and as long as there's a basis in
the record for reaching logically
reaching a conclusion. I I believe the
courts will uphold that.
>> I have a question for the attorneys
here. Um,
as has been stated, this lot seems to
have been created in 1954
um by
uh basically but by um
>> I don't know what the word is what the
words are by not being included in
transfer of land. Does that actually
create a lot or was the lot actually
created when the first deed that I can
come across is from 1980 that described
this 50 foot lot in a transfer. Um
>> no it would be created when it was
severed off from any adjoining parcels.
I mean it it first shown as a portion of
a lot in 1927 but it was only a portion
and then it um and it was conveyed along
other person from lot to lot
>> I'm sorry
>> it moved from lot 53 to lot 54 and then
it was left out
>> right so it was you know it was part of
lot 54 and five right it was kind of
those three and the southerntherly piece
of of lot 53
um those were all kind of grouped
together then she could the owner
conveyed away 54 and 55 which created in
essence a a leftover piece a a lot a
parcel maybe not a building lot that's
that remains to be seen but a parcel of
land and so in 1954 is the first time
that we see it um as a standalone piece
and then conveyed separately from that
just because there wasn't a deed that
specifically described it as a
standalone in 1953 it was effectively
created because the balance of the land
around it was conveyed off. So she
retained the owner at that time retained
just this 100 foot by 50 foot. Um
>> so it was never I'm understanding what
you're saying Wayne. It was it was never
actually created as a nonconforming lot.
It was just a piece of land that was
left off of two other pieces of land
that made to other people and just
created this vacant lot. was never
actually
I don't know how you say created as a
built as a non-performing lot. It was
never set up as a legal non-forming some
someone to buy. I don't think you want
to use the word legal non-p performing
lot as a a parcel.
>> Was it ever created as a parcel of land?
It was just a
>> locked off se parcel of land was left
there
>> in 1927.
This wasn't shown as a separate parcel.
was shown as part of lot 53
which
which is kind of I mean with the line
it's it's it's a little unusual kind of
looks like one two three it almost looks
like four of the surrounding lots all
grouped together but like the 19 the
1927 map shows it as this part as part
of lot 53 and then in 19
Um
>> you said 53
>> 19 I'm sorry 19 27 it was part of lot 56
and then um it conveyed over the course
of time with lots 54 and 55 which were
similar in length and width to this
piece. They were 50 by 100 or 370, I'm
sorry. 50 by 370, which is very similar
to this one, but for some reason on the
1927 map, there was a compilation of
like three or four of them that were all
kind of grouped together as lot 53. So,
so lot 54 and 55 were 50 by 370 and then
those conveyed along with the
southerntherly 50 ft of lot 53, which is
this remaining beach. Then after that 54
and 55 were subsequently carved off and
sell it to someone else and the owner
Shirley Bradley retained that 50 foot.
>> I I'm reading to the board a copy of the
1927 bag that was amended in 1934.
Yeah.
>> So
when you're talking about lot 53,
this is lot 53. It comprises all of
these.
>> All of these is lot 53
>> from here to here.
>> That's all left.
>> Lot 54 and 55 were were sold separately.
>> Mhm. Somehow in 195354
this 50 foot piece this piece that is in
question right there
>> that's partial B
and this here was sold to somebody else
>> right this was this was actually sold to
the people to to someone who bought 54
and 55. It was included in 54 and 55
and then
54 to 55 or so soul was leaving that
piece.
Correct.
>> I in in 1927
>> sort of 100 years ago.
>> I I was actually 1934. So they drew that
like maybe 30,
>> but those were all like individual.
>> Those were all lots
>> 50 by 100 foot lots all over the place
on the lake.
>> Oh,
>> this was a man.
>> Yeah, the lake was a real estate real
estate.
>> So these similar lots then you said 54
and 55 are sold together. They're sold
the property much more valuable 57 58
the other ones that look very similar.
Are those individual lots that were
built on?
>> They were actually sold together, too. I
don't think they're relevant to this
discussion.
>> Well, what's relevant to me is that are
were other homes or other lots designed
at that time to be sold as lots as 50
foot by whatever were all these design
because it looked like that the way they
designed all the way down the street
there's like 10 lots that are all 50
foot wide. Is that the way the land
would be sold in what was in the mind of
the end?
You know what I'm saying? Why was still
all these different Why
>> attorney Brand can I can I chime in
because I think he said that this that
holds no bearing, right? That's what I
gather from you.
>> And also it was common for these you
have to remember no one understands
today what a difference air conditioning
made right during during this period of
time you have these lake communities
being built all over New England. So
people built a cottage, a summer cottage
on a body of water to get escape the
heat of of of summer in the city, right?
And people bought two or three of them.
You might put a little tiny ting on one
of them. Some, as you can see, some
people bought several, a bigger house.
Over time, they were winterized. Um, but
I I think what I want to drop back to is
something that that that Wayne was
saying a few minutes ago that this
parcel was not quote separately
described in a deed as of 1954,
right? And and the regulation the the
regulation that attorney Riser was was
referencing is the deed it's legally
non-compliant. It was separately
described, but it wasn't separately
described. But that in my opinion is why
they're here for variance. All right.
That the fact that it was a se that's
why they would have an argument that
they don't need a variance if if it had
been separately described in 1954. It
wasn't right. But it it does exist as a
separate parcel separately described or
otherwise. And um and and I since we are
low on time, I do think that you have to
echo something that tree riser said, I
do think that you have discretion to to
grant or denied and I think you do have
open discretion and in terms of is it in
harmony with the purpose of spiritual
regulations? Uh is the reduction in in
non-conformity sufficient to balance the
creation of another house? all those
sorts of factors that you've been
kicking around here are all relevant
>> and so I I think you have discretion
whichever way you go
>> and also does limiting it to the
footprint so it's not an oversized house
also that balances in if you feel that's
appropriate we can make that a specific
you know tie tie the approval if you so
so fit to the specific footprint so it's
not a McMansion out there and
disproportionate with what else we're
seeing
And I probably shouldn't advocate for
the proponent, but there are two letters
on record of support from maybe from 66
Priscilla, which is up the hill, block
54 and 55.
>> Mhm.
>> And across the street, I
>> right the house is closest to where this
house will be.
>> Where this house will be. They're very
supportive
and the house there's our
>> 66 basula was at the public hearing
last.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. Their only concern was the
blasting and that doesn't need to be
done because there's no ledge there and
once that was satisfied they they were
all set.
>> Yeah. They didn't speak in opposition to
No,
>> I agree with the 30 principally
or hopefully. So, if there's any other
Okay. asking any other questions from
this board we watch through. So, do we
have any more questions? Are we done?
Anybody have any more? so we can wrap up
this part of our meeting.
>> I don't have anything else to offer. The
the only thing I would say is if you're
still, you know, on the fence and you're
feeling rushed now because I know we
have another meeting coming in. Even if
you close the hearing, I mean, we would
love that decision, but if you don't
feel there's time to deliberate tonight,
then you know, you can always deliberate
at the next meeting.
>> Again, I would really want to make sure
that both of you were here though at the
next meeting. That was the
>> That's the applicant's decision though,
right?
>> No, no. It's up to you. You can do that
whenever you whether I want you to or to
vote tonight or not. You have the
discretion of closing and then you don't
have to make a decision for a period of
time.
>> If you close the public hearing, you
have up to 65 days to make a decision.
So, it could be your next regular
meeting and you'd be fine.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, do we need to make a
motion do this or we just close the
>> post? Okay. So, motion we're done. I
think we need
>> Okay. So, close the public hearing. And
now we do a call to order for our
special meeting
at 650. 650. Call to order at 650 to
need to seat.
>> Okay. So, uh, we need to make a motion
to seat alternate. I make a motion to
seat Jones Ross as an alderman.
motion
in discussion
about that.
>> The only discussion I have is the only
reason I'm not going to use you is
because she was here
a lot longer here a lot more than you'll
get your chance
a little late. So anyways um so
therefore all in favor I
>> anybody against ordaining?
>> So Joan is hereby seated.
Any new business? This is our
>> seating somebody needs.
>> I'm sorry.
>> I don't think so.
>> The vote was
>> to seat but she she abstained correct
from seating herself.
>> She can vote.
>> She can vote. Okay.
>> Even if she didn't
>> I abstained from that vote. I vote.
>> You didn't have to.
>> Okay.
All right. Um I hope for myself. Come
on.
>> Yeah. Somebody has to. All right. So,
deliberation and action on the
application of Christine Gomez seeking a
variance
uh applicant seeking relief from section
11.2 two of the inzoning regulations
intended to reduce the nonconformities
of a currently vacant particle part
parcel on Basalo Basa road um MD there's
no uh 32 to 48 53 CB uh the applicant's
intention is to adjust the boundary line
between the vacant property owned by the
applicant and B solo road
by the applicant the proposed additional
land added to the vacant parcel and an
easement on 52 Bola to locate a septic
system is intended to support the
construction of a single family dwelling
on the vacant parcel.
So
now you would basically entertain a
motion.
>> Okay,
we we deliberate further but okay. So,
do we do we have a motion? Anybody wish
>> Mr. Cassuk has prepared for you a motion
for approval and a motion for denial.
And I would note for you the motion for
approval he already drafted for you has
complied to the plan submitted. So, you
don't need a special condition about the
house sheet or anything like that.
>> Do we have that here? Sorry. Thanks.
This is provided the
>> square
may not be that shape by
not
very
nice.
So I'm all set. Perfect.
>> So there was two motions prepared. One
to approve, one to get on.
>> There's actually a third vote through
there.
Third motion to continue the
deliberation. Oh yeah, too. That's true.
>> I I read the motion. I I read the
proposed motions. Um I being a newer
member, I
not made the first.
>> Okay.
>> You know, if that's okay. I don't
I'll I'll make a motion to approve. we
can discuss it and then we continue the
vote either way. It's how it would go.
So I'll make the motion to approve move
the the application 2515 GBA Christine
Colmes be approved at the PO provides
for a reduction in non-committees
associated with the parcel NBLU 32483CB
volume 147 page 77. Specifically the
board varies section 11.2 to Andover
Lake District lot area from 60,000 ft to
25,000 ft 118 25,18 ft and the front is
from 200 to 87.71 ft as depicted on the
boundary reconfiguration rec yeah
reconfiguration plan prepared by Rob
Holstrom land surveying LLC dated
December 4th 2025 with the conditions
also stated here. So um that makes it
open for discussion.
>> We'll do a second.
>> Do we have a second? Do we have a
second? Does anybody to second Bill's
motion.
>> I I will I will second. All right. So,
Mike's house has second. So, that makes
it open for discussion. Yes.
Any for discussion?
>> I'm just not sure I'm comfortable.
I know there's a million little
non-conforming lots and a million little
houses on them, but
that mean we have to keep progating
that. I don't know. And the and the and
the septic thing, two septics on one
building lot is a little weird to me,
but I but I you know I don't have a lot
of experience, so I just I'm saying I'm
not real comfortable.
>> But this isn't going to be a room house.
It's just not going to be the what
they're what they're planning,
>> right?
There's going to be two septics on one
building lot
>> and then a house on a lot that
doesn't meet our current building
requirements.
>> I I don't think that that's what we're
here to
>> 52 poula meets the requirements for the
lot.
>> Yeah. it does now and it will after.
>> And I and I think that the attorneys uh
kind of made it a little bit more clear
to me that we're not really here to
deliberate
that aspect of it. It's more so um how
the parcel was conveyed at the time. And
I think it would be reasonable to infer
that, you know, first of all, you're
looking at this was the original lot
size right here, and they're asking for
variance to have it be more conforming.
So, at the time, I think it's reasonable
to infer that those were the
>> confused 1934 with 1950.
>> Yeah, that's true, too. Yeah, that that
was again to go into that lander
1954,
>> right?
But we're
also to understand that there aren't
zoning regulations that existed.
>> Unfortunately, to my sugarin, I ordered
this building a building for
>> five minutes, please. Five minutes we
don't
there likely were but we just don't know
what they
>> I have I have probed everywhere I can
think of I've asked every person I can
think of and I don't think there's
anybody alive from that period of time
>> right so I think
so what's hang me up is the just the
smallness of the lot even with the
additional piece of lot 53 or the
additional piece of the conforming lot
that we're bill talking very a small lot
and I I agree with Jim that I don't know
that we should be keeping perpetuating
small lots.
>> I agree with that also and I
seated. So okay we should question third
discussion four minutes to
>> so um
>> so what happens if there if there needs
to be a continuation that
>> there's need to be continuation there's
a motion we have a vote on it right now
>> if you want to keep talking about it we
can keep talking about it if you want to
go to another third meeting or we can
call the question and take
>> so we've moved and we've seconded so
let's shout so we're going to call the
question if they want to move question.
Okay, don't move the question.
>> I don't know what that means.
>> You want to vote?
>> You want to move to another meeting?
>> Those are our choices. Either keep it
rolling or let's do it.
>> Okay. Vote. Do you want to vote?
>> You feel comfortable voting?
>> I'm comfortable voting.
>> Are you comfortable voting tonight?
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Vote. So all in favor of Bill's motion
to approve of this proposal say I I
>> that gives us three three and so all
against
>> so it's two.
>> So you voted twice.
>> No she just voted once. So voted to
approve. We have two votes against that
means motion not carried before.
>> Yeah.
>> Sorry about that folks.
>> No.
>> So we have to So our next thing is uh uh
next regular meeting February 18th.
>> I will not be here.
>> Do we have anything
here? Do we have anything for that Wayne
or
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. No. Um so if we hear from Wayne
motion to adjurnn
>> billion
motion to adjourn at 7:00 on the button
uh second all in favor
is adjourned.
>> No keep coming. We'll give you
>> time. Thank you.
I should future sex.